Add KEP 4802 - windows node shutdown (#4813)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-windows/4802-windows-node-shutdown/README.md

  - [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
- [Production Readiness Review Questionnaire](#production-readiness-review-questionnaire)
  - [Feature Enablement and Rollback](#feature-enablement-and-rollback)
  - [Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning](#rollout-upgrade-and-rollback-planning)
  - [Monitoring Requirements](#monitoring-requirements)
  - [Dependencies](#dependencies)
  - [Scalability](#scalability)
  - [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
- [Infrastructure Needed (Optional)](#infrastructure-needed-optional)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [x] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [x] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [x] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [x] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [x] (R) Graduation criteria is in place

> - [] (R) Production readiness review completed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [x] (R) Production readiness review completed
```

        kubeletConfig.ShutdownGracePeriod

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha Graduation

* Implemented the feature for Windows service only

* Investigate how e2e tests can be implemented (e.g. may need to create fake
  shutdown event)

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

* Addresses feedback from alpha testers
* Sufficient E2E and unit testing

#### Beta -> GA Graduation

* Addresses feedback from beta
* Sufficient number of users using the feature
* Confident that no further API / kubelet config configuration options changes are needed
* Close on any remaining open issues & bugs

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Before GA graduation, feature gates will be used to control the enable/disable of this enhacement. During all phase, 
in order to enable this feature, the kubelet itself will need to run as a windows service.

### Version Skew Strategy

n/a

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `WindowsGracefulNodeShutdown`

>   - Components depending on the feature gate:

Reviewer 2: kubelet

Author: updated

    yes (will require restart of kubelet)

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

The main behavior change is that during a node shutdown, pods running on the 
node will be terminated gracefully.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes, the feature can be disabled by either disabling the feature gate, or
      setting `kubeletConfig.ShutdownGracePeriod` to 0 seconds.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

Kubelet will attempt to perform graceful termination of pods during a
        node shutdown.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

  The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
  gates. 
  We have e2e tests to cover the feature when it is enabled and some predefined
  setting. 
  Will add node level integration tests when the node level test framework is available for Windows node

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

> This fail of rollout will behave like disabling this feature, it wil not impact running workloads during rollout/rollback.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what this is saying.

Author: Remove the confusion part

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

n/a

> The failure of the roll out will behave like disbling this feature, operators can check the log to get more specific info

Reviewer 2: Which logs?  What information will they contain?

Author: it should be the default kubelet log, add example for the error information

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

The feature is part of kubelet config so updating kubelet config should

> enable/disable the feature; upgrade/downgrade is N/A.

Reviewer 2: This is basically how all features work so upgrade and downgrade apply as normal.

Author: updated

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

As specified in [kep2000](https://github.com/zylxjtu/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2000-graceful-node-shutdown),
Kubelet should be aware of node shutdown and trigger graceful shutdown of pods
during a machine shutdown.

Node graceful shutdown has been available in Linux, this is to implement a comparable feature for Windows node

## Motivation

Users and cluster administrators expect that pods will adhere to expected pod
lifecycle including pod termination. Currently, when a node shuts down, pods do
not follow the expected pod termination lifecycle and are not terminated
gracefully which can cause issues for some workloads. This KEP aims to address
this problem by making the kubelet aware of the underlying node shutdown.

> Kubelet will propagate this signal to pods ensuring they can shutdown as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubelet will initiate a graceful shutdown of pods, respecting lifecycle events such as pre-stop hooks, allowing pods to shut down as intended by pod authors.
```

Author: updated

> gracefully as possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Author: updated

4. ACPI initiated shutdown/restart on the Windows machine
5. If a machine is a VM, the underlying hypervisor can press the “virtual”
   power button
6. For a cloud instance, stopping the instance via Cloud API, e.g. via `az vm stop -g xx -n xx`.
   Depending on the cloud provider, this may result in virtual power button press by the underlying hypervisor
7. Windows update (ex: Patch Tuesday) can also trigger a Windows node to be shutdown and rebooted

In the context of kubelet on Windows node, system is not
aware of the pods and containers running on the machine and will simply
kill them as regular Windows processes, that's the reason that we will need
to monitor the system for shutdown events and behave accordingly.

The high-level process of detecting a system shutdown on Windows is the same for all types of Windows applications and services. To detect a shutdown, 
we create a callback function and register it in the system. When a certain Windows event occurs, the system calls the callback function, transferring 
information about the event via input parameters. The callback function then analyzes the input parameter data, and executes code accordingly. In the 

> case of this feature related, the call back can detect the related (pre)shutdown event, and stop the pods gracefully before exiting

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
case of this feature, the call back can detect the related (pre)shutdown event, and stop the pods gracefully before exiting.
```

Author: updated

such as "SERVICE_CONTROL_PRESHUTDOWN", "SERVICE_CONTROL_SHUTDOWN". So in order to configure and process the (pre)shutdown event from Windows system, 
register the kubelet application as a Windows service program will be the most straightforward way.

Also from the same document [SetConsoleCtrlHandler function](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows/console/setconsolectrlhandler?redirectedfrom=MSDN),
It appears that "SERVICE_CONTROL_PRESHUTDOWN" is more flexible than "SERVICE_CONTROL_SHUTDOWN" for a Windows service to monitor and control

### Implementation
Similar with the linux case, "nodeshutdown_manager_windows.go" will be added to replace the current
fake/empty implementation for Windows, it will act as the main role in the node shutdown scenario and go through similar 
initialization/start process during kublet start up.

Also, we will update the Windows service package to "AcceptPreShutdown" and add a pre-shutdown handler to process
the "SERVICE_CONTROL_PRESHUTDOWN" event. This pre-shutdown handler will have an interface "ProcessShutdownEvent",
which will be implemented by the "nodeshutdown_manager_windows"

> The entry point of running the kublet as a Windows service is "InitService", in which, we can initialize and register 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The entry point of running the kubelet as a Windows service is "InitService", in which, we can initialize and register 
```

Author: updated

the service control handler, the above "pre-shutdown handler" is part of this service control handler.

At this "InitService" stage, the kubelet has not read the kubelet configs/flags yet, so the "nodeshutdown_manager_windows", 
has not been instantiated, we will then set the "preshutdownhander" to be NIL, so will ignore the preshutdown event if any. 
This should be safe as the kubelet itself has not been started, let alone the pods it manages, so there is no 
need to do anything for shutting down at this stage.

> When kubelet proceeds with starting up and initialize the "nodeshutdown_manager_window", it will set the service control ehandler’s 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When kubelet proceeds with starting up and initialize the "nodeshutdown_manager_window", it will set the service control handler’s 
```

Author: updated

pre-shutdownhandler to the "nodeshutdown_manager_window" and is now ready to monitor and process the preshutdown event

We will also add function of "UpdatePreShutdownInfo" and "QueryPreShutdownInfo" to Windows service package, these functions will be 
used by the "nodeshutdown_manager" to query and update the preshtudown timeout.

> If we will take the 'pre-shutdown timeout value as pariale with the 'InhibitDelayMaxSec` in linux,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If we treat the 'pre-shutdown timeout value as similar to the 'InhibitDelayMaxSec` in linux,
```

Author: updated

then the other parts of implementation will be pretty much similar with what linux has [implemented](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2000-graceful-node-shutdown#implementation)

The poc of the implementation can be found [here](https://github.com/zylxjtu/kubernetes/commit/854ea4bde88c0905241b43f5f80d470967bb909f#diff-8494875e9a1e884afd36f32fa90dceb2b827616f1e981ecb83a12901262214c7)

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

n/a

### Risks and Mitigations

Please refer to the the [part](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2000-graceful-node-shutdown#notesconstraintscaveats-optional) in KEP-2000

## Design Details

Use the same Kubelet Config as in linux.
```
type KubeletConfiguration struct {
    ...
    ShutdownGracePeriod metav1.Duration
    ShutdownGracePeriodCriticalPods metav1.Duration
}
```

> Communication with service control manager will make use of golang.org/x/sys/windows/svc packag,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Communication with service control manager will make use of golang.org/x/sys/windows/svc package,
```

Author: updated

which is already included in [vendor](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/release-1.19/vendor/golang.org/x/sys/windows)

Termination of pods will make use of the existing
[killPod](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.19/pkg/kubelet/pod_workers.go#L292) function
from the `kubelet` package and specify the appropriate `gracePeriodOverride` as
necessary.

### Test Plan

[x] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

##### Unit tests

> It does not seem possible to unit test the Windows logic of setting service handler and update registry keys

Reviewer 3: This needs some clarification. Are we saying that we can't simulate a shutdown using registry?

Reviewer: I think this is saying that we cannot simulate setting the registry keys that control service shutdown behavior (specifically WaitToKillServiceTimeout`
From https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/services/service-control-handler-function 

+1 for some clarification in the KEP

Author: Add more clarification

The main logic of kill pod is the same as what linux did and there has been unit tests covered there.

##### Integration tests

There are efforts being worked on, but automated testing framework for Windows node level integration is not ready yet.

> Unitl then, we will cover all the scenerios with e2e test

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Until then, we will cover all the scenerios with e2e tests.
```

Author: will update

    *   Pod’s ExecStop and SIGTERM handlers are given gracePeriodSeconds for
        case when gracePeriodSeconds <= kubeletConfig.ShutdownGracePeriod
    *   Pod’s ExecStop and SIGTERM handlers are given
        kubeletConfig.ShutdownGracePeriod for case when gracePeriodSeconds >
        kubeletConfig.ShutdownGracePeriod

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha Graduation

* Implemented the feature for Windows service only

* Investigate how e2e tests can be implemented (e.g. may need to create fake
  shutdown event)

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

* Addresses feedback from alpha testers
* Sufficient E2E and unit testing

#### Beta -> GA Graduation

* Addresses feedback from beta
* Sufficient number of users using the feature
* Confident that no further API / kubelet config configuration options changes are needed
* Close on any remaining open issues & bugs

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Before GA graduation, feature gates will be used to control the enable/disable of this enhacement. During all phase, 
in order to enable this feature, the kubelet itself will need to run as a windows service.

### Version Skew Strategy

n/a

> ## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

Reviewer 2: This KEP's markdown does not seem to be following the standard template.  Please update it to the regular template.

Author: updated with new template format

  Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
  automations, so be extremely careful here.

    * The main behavior change is that during a node shutdown, pods running on
      the node will be terminated gracefully.

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**
  Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
  feature, can it break the existing applications?).

    * Yes, the feature can be disabled by either disabling the feature gate, or
      setting `kubeletConfig.ShutdownGracePeriod` to 0 seconds.

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**

    * Kubelet will attempt to perform graceful termination of pods during a
        node shutdown.

* **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**
  The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
  gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
  with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
  conversion tests if API types are being modified.

>     *   n/a

Reviewer 2: I don't see how this feature could be meaningfully tested without an e2e.

Author: we do have e2e test, please refer to the attached code PR link, will add more clarification for this

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **How can a rollout fail? Can it impact already running workloads?**
  Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
   mid-rollout?

This feature should not impact rollouts.

* **What specific metrics should inform a rollback?**

> N/A.

Reviewer 2: I think this section is more asking 'if there is bug in the feature' how would an admin figure out that this feature was the cause of it.

Author: added

* **Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?**
  Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
  Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
  are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.

The feature is part of kubelet config so updating kubelet config should
enable/disable the feature; upgrade/downgrade is N/A.

* **Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs,
fields of API types, flags, etc.?**
  Even if applying deprecation policies, they may still surprise some users.

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?**
  Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
  checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
  logs or events for this purpose.

Check if the feature gate and kubelet config settings are enabled on a node.

> * **What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine

Reviewer 2: `How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?` is missing from the KEP template.

Author: Added

the health of the service?**
  - [ ] Metrics
    - Metric name:
    - [Optional] Aggregation method:
    - Components exposing the metric:
  - [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
    - Details:

> N/A

Reviewer 2: I think you need at least logs since those can be persisted across reboots.

Author: Added

- [x] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [x] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

As specified in [kep2000](https://github.com/zylxjtu/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2000-graceful-node-shutdown),
Kubelet should be aware of node shutdown and trigger graceful shutdown of pods
during a machine shutdown.

> Node graceful shutdown has been available in Linux, this is to implement a comparable feature for Windows node

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Node graceful shutdown has been available in Linux, this is to implement a comparable feature for Windows nodes.
```

Author: updated

lifecycle including pod termination. Currently, when a node shuts down, pods do
not follow the expected pod termination lifecycle and are not terminated
gracefully which can cause issues for some workloads. This KEP aims to address
this problem by making the kubelet aware of the underlying node shutdown.
Kubelet will propagate this signal to pods ensuring they can shutdown as
gracefully as possible.

### Goals

*   Focus on handling shutdown on machines where kubelet itself runs as a Windows service, 
    on machines where kubelet is loaded through other loaders such as nssm.exe, this feature 
    will not be able to be enabled.
*   Make kubelet aware of underlying node shutdown event and trigger pod
    termination with sufficient grace period to shutdown properly
*   Handle node shutdown in cloud-provider agnostic way
*   Introduce minimal shutdown delay in order to shutdown node soon as possible
    (but not sooner)

### Non-Goals

*   Let users modify or change existing pod lifecycle or introduce new inner
    pod depencides / shutdown ordering
*   Support for this feature when the kubelet is not running as a Windows service (ex: loaded through nssm.exe), 

>     under those scenarios, kublet will run with this feature being disabled, while operators/developers

Author: I will update accordingly, feel free to let me know if you will have different thoughts

    shutdown

## Proposal

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

*   As a cluster administrator, I can configure the nodes in my cluster to
    allocate X seconds for my pods to terminate gracefully during a node
    shutdown

#### Story 2

*   As a developer I can expect that my pods will terminate gracefully during
    node shutdowns

### Background on Windows Shutdown

In the context of this KEP, shutdown is referred to as shutdown or restart of the
underlying Windows machine. A shutdown can be initiated via a
variety of methods for example:

1. `shutdown /t 0`
2. `shutdown /t 30` `#schedule a delayed shutdown in 30 seconds`
3. `shutdown /r /t 30` `#schedule a delayed restart in 30 seconds`
4. ACPI initiated shutdown/restart on the Windows machine
5. If a machine is a VM, the underlying hypervisor can press the “virtual”
   power button
6. For a cloud instance, stopping the instance via Cloud API, e.g. via `az vm stop -g xx -n xx`.
   Depending on the cloud provider, this may result in virtual power button press by the underlying hypervisor
7. Windows update (ex: Patch Tuesday) can also trigger a Windows node to be shutdown and rebooted

> In the context of kuberlet on Windows node, system is not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the context of kubelet on Windows node, system is not
```

Author: updated

    ShutdownGracePeriodCriticalPods metav1.Duration
}
```

Communication with service control manager will make use of golang.org/x/sys/windows/svc packag,
which is already included in [vendor](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/release-1.19/vendor/golang.org/x/sys/windows)

Termination of pods will make use of the existing
[killPod](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.19/pkg/kubelet/pod_workers.go#L292) function
from the `kubelet` package and specify the appropriate `gracePeriodOverride` as
necessary.

### Test Plan

[x] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

##### Unit tests

It does not seem possible to unit test the Windows logic of setting service handler and update registry keys

The main logic of kill pod is the same as what linux did and there has been unit tests covered there.

##### Integration tests

Node level integration test will be added later when the node e2e test framework is available for Windows node

> - <test>: <link to test coverage>

Reviewer: Can you add something saying we don't currently have an automated way to run integration tests for Windows specific code and we will cover all the scenarios with e2e tests?

motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

Users and cluster administrators expect that pods will adhere to expected pod
lifecycle including pod termination. Currently, when a node shuts down, pods do
not follow the expected pod termination lifecycle and are not terminated
gracefully which can cause issues for some workloads. This KEP aims to address
this problem by making the kubelet aware of the underlying node shutdown.
Kubelet will propagate this signal to pods ensuring they can shutdown as
gracefully as possible.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

*   Make kubelet aware of underlying node shutdown event and trigger pod
    termination with sufficient grace period to shutdown properly
*   Handle node shutdown in cloud-provider agnostic way
*   Introduce minimal shutdown delay in order to shutdown node soon as possible
    (but not sooner)

> *   Focus on handling shutdown on machines which kubelet itself runs as a windows service

Author: Added more clarification

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

*   Let users modify or change existing pod lifecycle or introduce new inner
    pod depencides / shutdown ordering

> *   Support kubelet running as a non-windows service

Reviewer 4: Can you add a section below that defines what happens if this feature is enabled when running as a "non-windows" service?  

Will the user be notified that the feature will not work as expected? does kubelet fail to start?

> *   Support kubelet running as a non-windows service

Reviewer: We should probably mirror the linux behavior w.r.t. failing for invalid configurations.
IIRC only systemd based services support graceful shutdown on linux. 
What happens if kubelet settings to enable this are set on a non systemd based node?

> *   Support kubelet running as a non-windows service

Author: will add

*   Support Cancellation of windows shutdown
*   Provide guarantee to handle all cases of graceful node shutdown, for
    example abrupt shutdown or sudden power cable pull can’t result in graceful
    shutdown

>  *   Support the cancellation of shutdown  

Author: Removed duplication

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

*   As a cluster administrator, I can configure the nodes in my cluster to
    allocate X seconds for my pods to terminate gracefully during a node
    shutdown

#### Story 2

*   As a developer I can expect that my pods will terminate gracefully during
    node shutdowns

### Background on Windows Shutdown

> In the context of this KEP, shutdown is referred to as shutdown of the

Author: will add

underlying windows machine. A shutdown can be initiated via a
variety of methods for example:

1. `shutdown /t 0`
2. `shutdown /t 30` `#schedule a delayed shutdown in 30 seconds`
3. Physically pressing the power button on the machine
4. If a machine is a VM, the underlying hypervisor can press the “virtual”
   power button
5. For a cloud instance, stopping the instance via Cloud API, e.g. via `az vm stop -g xx -n xx`.
   Depending on the cloud provider, this may result in virtual power button press by the underlying hypervisor.

In the context of kubernetes on windows node, system is not
aware of the pods and containers running on the machine and will simply
kill them as regular windows processes, that's the reason that we will need

> to monitoring the system shutdown and behave accrodingly.

Author: updated

The high-level process of detecting a system shutdown on windows is the same for all types of Windows applications and services. To detect a shutdown, 
we create a callback function and register it in the system. When a certain Windows event occurs, the system calls the callback function, transferring 

> information about the event via input parameters. The callback function then analyzes the input parameter data, and executes code accordingly.

Author: will add

There’s no one way to make all types of applications (console, GUI and windows services) detect a node shutdown, different types of applications differ 
in their syntax and functionality.

For general windows console application, it can process the "CTRL_SHUTDOWN_EVENT", but according to [HandlerRoutine callback function](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/console/handlerroutine#parameters)
and the [SetConsoleCtrlHandler function](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/console/setconsolectrlhandler?redirectedfrom=MSDN) 
`Console functions, or any C run-time functions that call console functions, may not work reliably during processing of any of the three signals mentioned previously. 
The reason is that some or all of the internal console cleanup routines may have been called before executing the process signal handler`.

> While for windows service programs, we will have more freedom to register a service control handler to monitoring various shutdown related event 

Author: will update

> such as "SERVICE_CONTROL_PRESHUTDOWN", "SERVICE_CONTROL_SHUTDOWN". So in order to configure and process the (pre)shutdown event from windows system, 

Author: updated

register the kubelet application as a windows service program will be the most straightforward way.

> Aso from the same document [SetConsoleCtrlHandler function](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/console/setconsolectrlhandler?redirectedfrom=MSDN),

Author: updated

> It appears that "SERVICE_CONTROL_PRESHUTDOWN" is more flexible than "SERVICE_CONTROL_SHUTDOWN" for a windows service to monitor and control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It appears that "SERVICE_CONTROL_PRESHUTDOWN" is more flexible than "SERVICE_CONTROL_SHUTDOWN" for a Windows service to monitor and control
```

Author: updated

> ### Implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Implementation

```

Similar with the linux case, "nodeshutdown_manager_windows.go" will be added to replace the current

> dumb implementation for windows, it will act as the main role in the node shutdown scenario and go through similar 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
naive implementation for Windows, it will act as the main role in the node shutdown scenario and go through similar 
```

Author: updated

initialization/start process during kublet start up.

Also, we will update the windows service package to "AcceptPreShutdown" and add a pre-shutdown handler to process
the "SERVICE_CONTROL_PRESHUTDOWN" event. This pre-shutdown handler will have an interface "ProcessShutdownEvent",
which will be implemented by the "nodeshutdown_manager_windows"

The entry point of running the kublet as a windows service is "InitService", in which, we can initialize and register 
the servcie control handler, the above "pre-shutdown handler" is part of this service control handler.

At this "InitService" stage, the kubelet has not read the kubelet configs/flags yet, so the "nodeshutdown_manager_windows", 
has not been instantiated, we will then set the "preshutdownhander" to be NIL, so will ignore the preshutdown event if any. 

> This should be safe enough as the kubelset itself has not been started, let alone the pods it managed, so there is nothing 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This should be safe as the kubelet itself has not been started, let alone the pods it manages, so there is no
```

Author: updated

need to do for shutting down at this stage.

When kubelet proceeds with starting up and initialize the "nodeshutdown_manager_window", it will set the servic control ehandler’s 
pre-shutdownhandler to the "nodeshutdown_manager_window" and is now ready to monitor and process the preshutdown event

We will also add function of "UpdatePreShutdownInfo" and "QueryPreShutdownInfo" to windows service package, these functions will be 
used by the "nodeshutdown_manager" to query and update the preshtudown timeout.

If we will take the 'pre-shutdown timeout value as pariale with the 'InhibitDelayMaxSec` in linux,
then the other parts of implementation will be pretty much similar with what linux has [implemented](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2000-graceful-node-shutdown#implementation)

The poc of the implementation can be found [here](https://github.com/zylxjtu/kubernetes/commit/854ea4bde88c0905241b43f5f80d470967bb909f#diff-8494875e9a1e884afd36f32fa90dceb2b827616f1e981ecb83a12901262214c7)

> ### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

Reviewer: Please add a note saying that we are aware alternate service managers on Windows like nssm.exe handle things like log-rotate for us and updating the logging mechanisms to handles this is our of scope for this kep but we'll look into other tools like the kube-runner as alternatives.

Author: will add

- [Infrastructure Needed (Optional)](#infrastructure-needed-optional)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

<!--
**ACTION REQUIRED:** In order to merge code into a release, there must be an
issue in [kubernetes/enhancements] referencing this KEP and targeting a release
milestone **before the [Enhancement Freeze](https://git.k8s.io/sig-release/releases)
of the targeted release**.

For enhancements that make changes to code or processes/procedures in core
Kubernetes—i.e., [kubernetes/kubernetes], we require the following Release
Signoff checklist to be completed.

Check these off as they are completed for the Release Team to track. These
checklist items _must_ be updated for the enhancement to be released.
-->

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [x] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [x] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [x] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [x] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [x] (R) Graduation criteria is in place

> - [x] (R) Production readiness review completed

Reviewer 5: I think you can't really mark these with an Alpha feature.

Author: same comments as the following one?

Reviewer 5: I think a few of these can be marked. PRR I don't think you have got a review for that yet. You have it requested but there is still active discussion on it.

> - [x] (R) Production readiness review completed

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
```

Author: will remove the mark on lin141

- [ ] Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> <!--

Author: found the info in the 1st line, will remove, thanks for reminding!

gracefully which can cause issues for some workloads. This KEP aims to address
this problem by making the kubelet aware of the underlying node shutdown.
Kubelet will propagate this signal to pods ensuring they can shutdown as
gracefully as possible.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
*   Focus on handling shutdown on machines where kubelet itself runs as a Windows service, 
    on machines where kubelet is loaded through other loaders such as nssm.exe, this feature 
    will not be able to be enabled.
*   Make kubelet aware of underlying node shutdown event and trigger pod
    termination with sufficient grace period to shutdown properly
*   Handle node shutdown in cloud-provider agnostic way
*   Introduce minimal shutdown delay in order to shutdown node soon as possible
    (but not sooner)

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

*   Let users modify or change existing pod lifecycle or introduce new inner
    pod depencides / shutdown ordering

> *   Support kubelet itselft running as a non-Windows service (ex: loaded through nssm.exe), 
>     under those scenarios, kublet will run with this feature being disabled, while operators/developers
>     can get corresponding feature disabling information from the kublet logs

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Support for this feature when the kubelet is not running as a Windows service.
```
Should the kubelet not start if this feature flag is enabled just to make it clear to the operator?

Author: There was a discussion on this before, I think we would like to keep it to be similar with the linux way - do not block the kubelet start but have some information in the logs

Author: will update lin224

nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

*   As a cluster administrator, I can configure the nodes in my cluster to
    allocate X seconds for my pods to terminate gracefully during a node
    shutdown

#### Story 2

*   As a developer I can expect that my pods will terminate gracefully during
    node shutdowns

### Background on Windows Shutdown

In the context of this KEP, shutdown is referred to as shutdown or restart of the
underlying Windows machine. A shutdown can be initiated via a
variety of methods for example:

1. `shutdown /t 0`
2. `shutdown /t 30` `#schedule a delayed shutdown in 30 seconds`
3. `shutdown /r /t 30` `#schedule a delayed restart in 30 seconds`
4. Physically pressing the power button on the machine
5. If a machine is a VM, the underlying hypervisor can press the “virtual”
   power button
6. For a cloud instance, stopping the instance via Cloud API, e.g. via `az vm stop -g xx -n xx`.

>    Depending on the cloud provider, this may result in virtual power button press by the underlying hypervisor

Reviewer 6: I suggest not using the "power button" analogy here but rather be generic and mention ACPI initiated shutdown / restart using the options provided by Windows.

7. Windows update (ex: Patch Tuesday) can also trigger a Windows node to be shutdown and rebooted

> In the context of kubernetes on Windows node, system is not

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In the context of kubelet on Windows node, system is not
```

Author: will update

aware of the pods and containers running on the machine and will simply
kill them as regular Windows processes, that's the reason that we will need
to monitor the system for shutdown events and behave accordingly.

The high-level process of detecting a system shutdown on Windows is the same for all types of Windows applications and services. To detect a shutdown, 
we create a callback function and register it in the system. When a certain Windows event occurs, the system calls the callback function, transferring 
information about the event via input parameters. The callback function then analyzes the input parameter data, and executes code accordingly. In the 

> case of this feature related, the call back can detect the related (pre)shutdown event, and kill the pods gracefully before exiting

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
case of this feature related, the call back can detect the related (pre)shutdown event, and stop the pods gracefully before exiting
```

There’s no one way to make all types of applications (console, GUI and Windows services) detect a node shutdown, different types of applications differ 

> in their syntax and functionality.

Reviewer 6: Is there a reason for this statement? It feels irrelevant from a kubelet perspective as it does not manage anything other than Pods on the node.

Author: This is basically trying to explain why we chose to run kubelet itset as a windows service, the following paragraphs have more details on this. by applications I mean Console/GUI vs window services, not pods vs non-pods, hope this clarifies. thanks!

For general Windows console application, it can process the "CTRL_SHUTDOWN_EVENT", but according to [HandlerRoutine callback function](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/console/handlerroutine#parameters)
and the [SetConsoleCtrlHandler function](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows/console/setconsolectrlhandler?redirectedfrom=MSDN) 
`Console functions, or any C run-time functions that call console functions, may not work reliably during processing of any of the three signals mentioned previously. 

> The reason is that some or all of the internal console cleanup routines may have been called before executing the process signal handler`.

Reviewer 6: Is this the reason why the feature cannot be supported when kubelet is running from the CLI? I suggest explicitly calling that out here.

Reviewer 6: I am fine with that. How about we call that out in the beta graduation section?

Author: Will keep it here and update later during beta graduation

Reviewer 6: There is a bit of confusion here. If we are going to tackle allowing this feature when running in CLI as pre-req for beta graduation then we should not mention the issue here nor in non-goals. Or are we saying that we will decide if this is even possible only in beta and is not a criteria for graduation?

Reviewer: I was suggesting that we will decide if this is even possible before graduating to beta / not worrying about non-cli use cases for the (initial) alpha implementation.

Reviewer 6: Sounds good.

register the kubelet application as a Windows service program will be the most straightforward way.

Also from the same document [SetConsoleCtrlHandler function](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows/console/setconsolectrlhandler?redirectedfrom=MSDN),
It appears that "SERVICE_CONTROL_PRESHUTDOWN" is more flexible than "SERVICE_CONTROL_SHUTDOWN" for a Windows service to monitor and control

### Implementation
Similar with the linux case, "nodeshutdown_manager_windows.go" will be added to replace the current
fake/empty implementation for Windows, it will act as the main role in the node shutdown scenario and go through similar 
initialization/start process during kublet start up.

Also, we will update the Windows service package to "AcceptPreShutdown" and add a pre-shutdown handler to process
the "SERVICE_CONTROL_PRESHUTDOWN" event. This pre-shutdown handler will have an interface "ProcessShutdownEvent",
which will be implemented by the "nodeshutdown_manager_windows"

The entry point of running the kublet as a Windows service is "InitService", in which, we can initialize and register 

> the servcie control handler, the above "pre-shutdown handler" is part of this service control handler.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
the service control handler, the above "pre-shutdown handler" is part of this service control handler.
```

Author: updated

At this "InitService" stage, the kubelet has not read the kubelet configs/flags yet, so the "nodeshutdown_manager_windows", 
has not been instantiated, we will then set the "preshutdownhander" to be NIL, so will ignore the preshutdown event if any. 
This should be safe as the kubelet itself has not been started, let alone the pods it manages, so there is no 
need to do anything for shutting down at this stage.

> When kubelet proceeds with starting up and initialize the "nodeshutdown_manager_window", it will set the servic control ehandler’s 

Author: updated

pre-shutdownhandler to the "nodeshutdown_manager_window" and is now ready to monitor and process the preshutdown event

We will also add function of "UpdatePreShutdownInfo" and "QueryPreShutdownInfo" to Windows service package, these functions will be 
used by the "nodeshutdown_manager" to query and update the preshtudown timeout.

If we will take the 'pre-shutdown timeout value as pariale with the 'InhibitDelayMaxSec` in linux,
then the other parts of implementation will be pretty much similar with what linux has [implemented](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2000-graceful-node-shutdown#implementation)

The poc of the implementation can be found [here](https://github.com/zylxjtu/kubernetes/commit/854ea4bde88c0905241b43f5f80d470967bb909f#diff-8494875e9a1e884afd36f32fa90dceb2b827616f1e981ecb83a12901262214c7)

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

> Third patry service manager on Windows (other than the native sc.exe) such as nssm.exe support log redirection and log file rotation, 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Third party service manager on Windows (other than the native sc.exe) such as nssm.exe support log redirection and log file rotation, 
```
I don't follow this. This seems like a general disadvantage of running kubelet as a service using sc.exe and has nothing to do with the feature.

Reviewer: I think that not supporting things like log rotation IS a disadvantage of running kubelet with sc.exe - but I don't believe nssm.exe passes the control signals to apps it runs - which is an advantage of sc.exe and needed for this scenario.

I asked for this to be called out in the notes / caveats section because there will be trade-offs between running kubelet via nssm.exe and as a native windows service which would be good to highlight.

I think we can have something like https://github.com/kubernetes/component-base/blob/v0.31.1/logs/kube-log-runner/kube-log-runner.go wrap the kubelet when kubelet is run as a native windows service to get the best of both tools but I don't think that should tied to this KEP.

@aravindhp - what do you think? I'm OK if we want to just remove this section too...

Reviewer 6: I suggest removing the section. Using sc.exe vs nssm.exe is orthogonal to the feature being introduced. We shouldn't give folks the impression that it is somehow related.

Author: will update

##### Prerequisite testing updates

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

##### Unit tests

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->
It does not seem possible to unit test the Windows logic of setting service handler and update registry keys

The main logic of kill pod is the same as what linux did and there has been unit tests covered there.
<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

> - `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`

Reviewer 6: This is missing.

Author: I think I will remove this. as stated in the line 419-421, the main logic of killpod has been covered in the linux part (same logic) and it is hard to simulate the monitoring of shutdown event in unit test

##### Integration tests

<!--
Integration tests are contained in k8s.io/kubernetes/test/integration.
Integration tests allow control of the configuration parameters used to start the binaries under test.
This is different from e2e tests which do not allow configuration of parameters.
Doing this allows testing non-default options and multiple different and potentially conflicting command line options.
-->

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.

> For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

Reviewer 6: Please fill this in.

Author: By integration test, my understanding is that will be at the node level. right now, we do not have windows node level test yet and my thought is that we skip the integration test but add an e2e test. We may will to add/move a node level e2e test when the test infrastructure is available.

Reviewer 5: I think you are correct on this @zylxjtu but you should mention that logic in this section.

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md
-->

#### Alpha Graduation

* Implemented the feature for Windows service only

* Investigate how e2e tests can be implemented (e.g. may need to create fake
  shutdown event)

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

* Addresses feedback from alpha testers
* Sufficient E2E and unit testing

#### Beta -> GA Graduation

* Addresses feedback from beta
* Sufficient number of users using the feature
* Confident that no further API / kubelet config configuration options changes are needed
* Close on any remaining open issues & bugs

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

> n/a

Reviewer 6: What about the hypothetical case of someone running the kubelet from the CLI and then upgrading to the version and enabling the feature flag? Do we need to call out that the feature won't be enabled?

Author: will add more information

Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/20190731-production-readiness-review-process.md.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed for features in
v1.19 or later, but is non-blocking at this time. That is, approval is not
required in order to be in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.

-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

_This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release._

* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

>     - Feature gate name: `GracefulNodeShutdown`

Reviewer 5: I think you should have a separate feature gate named `WindowsGracefulNodeShutdown`.

That way this can proceed without blocking the other graceful node shutdwon feature.

Author: yes, thanks for this, already updated in the coming iteration

    - Components depending on the feature gate:
      - `kubelet`
  - [ ] Other
    - Describe the mechanism:
    - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
      plane?
      - no
    - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
      of a node? (Do not assume `Dynamic Kubelet Config` feature is enabled).

>       - yes (will require restart of kubelet)

Reviewer 6: You can remove this.

Author: Can you please explain a bit on the reason why need to remove, sound to me useful information?

Reviewer 6: Because you have picked `Feature Gate` to enable and disable the feature. You don't have any `Other` way to enable and disable this feature. At least that is how I understood the question.

Author: this looks to me to confirm if the enabling/disabling this feature will cause the controlplane/node downtime.

Reviewer 6: I can see your point too. I will let someone else make the call on this. Please don't resolve this thread so that it is visible to others.

Reviewer 2: I would leave this as-is since a restart is required.

* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**
  Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
  automations, so be extremely careful here.

    * The main behavior change is that during a node shutdown, pods running on
      the node will be terminated gracefully.

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**

>   Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.

Reviewer 6: You can remove this given you have updated kep.yaml

Author: removed line 637
